---
layout: post
title: A Case against "Programming Paradigms"
---

Several people have questioned the use of "paradigms" as a means to classify programming languages. I find that "programming paradigms" do not reflect the capabilities of programming languages precisely enough. Likewise, the term can also mislead programmers into solving problems by some ambiguous, narrowly-imposed way instead of making choices that best suit the task at hand. There are at least two ways we may avoid these issues. Viewing languages as a composition of more precisely defined language features rather than vague "paradigms" can alleviate the former problem. By changing our terminology from "programming paradigms" to another term, such as "programming styles", we can avoid the latter problem. If the term "programming paradigm" is not removed from our literature, we should at least be aware that they are not precise enough to prematurely judge a language from them. We should also recognize that rigid conformance to a certain paradigm is not necessarily better than an "impure", but judicious combination of features from different paradigms.

[Shriram Krishnamurthi](http://cs.brown.edu/~sk/Publications/Papers/Published/sk-teach-pl-post-linnaean/paper.pdf), a computer scientist whom has worked on the Racket programming language and [Programming Languages: Application and Interpretation (PLAI)](http://cs.brown.edu/~sk/Publications/Books/ProgLangs/) contends that Computer Science's former science-envy caused people to categorize languages via paradigms, and that many languages do not easily fit into this paradigm taxonomy. Instead, languages should be viewed as aggregations of features, as this allows one to decompose a language into its constituent, individually studied features.

There are endless debates and value judgements based on comparing languages by what "paradigms" they support. Many of these debates are further misguided by people having incomplete or objectively wrong notions of what a programming language actually supports. A prominent example of this is the debate on whether or not JavaScript is "object-oriented". Almost everything in JavaScript is an object, including functions. However, JavaScript uses "prototypal inheritance" while languages such as C++, Java and C# use what could be called "classical inheritance" or "class-based inheritance". Neither one is objectively better than another, but that doesn't stop people of any intelligence or experience from debating if one or the other is "better than" or "closer to" the object-oriented paradigm. Many people use JavaScript with more of a functional-style than an object-oriented one. Does this mean that JavaScript is a "functional" or "multiparadigm" language? Does the fact that most things in the language are objects, including functions themselves, make the language "less functional"? It appears that terms like "supports the object-oriented paradigm" is too imprecise, and we can continue to add extra qualifiers like "prototype-based" and the catch-all "multiparadigm" until our classification scheme becomes a complete mess. Instead of this top-down attempt of classifying programming languages, we should instead focus on classifying languages from a bottom-up composition of features. The top-down approach can only give an obscured view of what a language consists of, and we shouldn't judge a language strictly by this criterion.

[Bjarne Stroustrup](https://youtu.be/86xWVb4XIyE?t=1h10m28s), the creator and one of the contributors to the C++ programming language, also dislikes this term. He argues that the term "paradigm" may lead people to believe that it is best to focus on one style of programming, which leads them to impose unnecessary constraints and workarounds while programming. Instead, we should use language features most suitable to the task at hand. The term "paradigm" may also lead one to believe that old paradigms are replaced with new ones. However, new programming paradigms do not render the old ones obsolete, as in certain cases, older paradigms can be more useful than the "current" paradigm.

I avoid the term "programming paradigm" and use other terms like "programming style" instead, as the latter does not have the connotations of obsolescence. Mixing programming styles can be more beneficial than sticking with just one, as the well-received additions of generic and functional programming features have shown in several formerly "object-oriented" languages. Additionally, there is more to choosing a language for a project than the language itself, let alone what "paradigms" it supports. How familiar yourself or your team is with a language, constraints for cost, correctness, power consumption, and development speed, and many other factors are necessary to make a good judgement on language choice. In certain scenarios, like embedded systems programming, you may need to use languages that use an "older" programming style, such as structured programming. Other styles of programming may be suboptimal for this example and other situations. Do not let rigidity to a programming style or "paradigm" come before what's best for your project.

Should we get rid of the term "programming paradigm"? Of all the computer science terms out there, many of which with disputed definitions, the term is relatively ingrained and has a relatively well-accepted meaning. If we do not get rid of this term, we should at least consider a more bottom-up approach of evaluating languages, and be aware that mixing paradigms can sometimes be the best decision for your project.
